+++
topics = ["about"]
title = "About"
+++

# The Virtual Laboratory Environment

[VLE][VLE] is a multi-modeling and simulation platform. It is a powerful
modeler and a simulator supporting the use of different formalisms for the
specification of models and implementing the corresponding solvers in a unified
manner.

In addition to the classical use of one single formalism for modeling and
simulation, [VLE][VLE] integrates, i.e. couples, heterogeneous formalisms in
one coherent simulation model. [VLE][VLE] supports the new generation of inter-
disciplinary simulation models…

[VLE] is mainly used by the [RECORD](http://www6.inra.fr/record/) platform.
RECORD is a platform of modeling and simulation of the agro-ecosystems. RECORD
offers a set of software tools based on top of the [VLE][VLE] software suite.
RECORD provides also  *webrecord* (web interface for models) and a library
models. It is open to the community INRA and its partners. This project is
supported by [Environnement & Agronomie](http://www.ea.inra.fr/en) and [Applied
Mathematics and Informatics divisions](http://www.mia.inra.fr/en) of the
[INRA](http://www.inra.fr/en) (French National Institute for Agricultural
Research).

# Discrete Event Simulation platform

VLE is a multi-modeling and simulation platform. It is a powerful modeler and a
simulator supporting the use of different formalisms for the specification of
models and implementing the corresponding solvers in a unified manner.

VLE proposes a lot of formalisms called DEVS extensions:

- Difference equation.
- Differential equation for the resolution of differential equation systems
  with QSS, Euler, Runge Kutta methods
- Finite State Automate: FD DEVS, UML State-chart, Moore and Mealy
- High level Petri net
- CellDEVS: cellular automata
- CellQSS: association of CellDEVS and QSS for the resolution of spatialized
  differential equation systems
- Decision

Based on the DEVS theory, we ensure the compatibility of models and DEVS
extensions at formal and operational levels.

# VLE as an environment

VLE provides complete libraries named *VLE Foundation Libraries* (VFL) and
tools for models design and simulation:

- GVLE is a graphical user interface. It provides tools to visually construct a
  hierarchy of coupled models. A modelling plug-in can be use to define and to
  modify the behaviour of atomic models displaying a text editor where DEVS
  functions can be coded. Moreover, GVLE enables the definition of experimental
  frames. Results of the modeling activity (structure and dynamics of the
  models) are stored in a particular XML format call VPZ (*Virtual laboratory
  Project Zip*).
- VLE is the core of the environment. The four other applications depend on VLE
  (that is why the name of this application is the same as the general
  framework). VLE implements the DEVS abstracts simulators and the extensions
  cited in the previous section. To perform simulations, VLE records the
  experimental frame generated by GVLE and then dynamically loads simulation
  and visualisation components of EOV and finally connect them to the DEVS-Bus.
  The Simulation plug-ins simulate the behaviours of the DEVS atomic models and
  VLE coordinates the simulation.
- RVLE (R for VLE) is a R-Package to build experimental frames, to edit VPZ, to
  launch the simulation and to get the results of the simulation within the R
  environment.
- PyVLE (Python for VLE) is a Python package to build experimental frames, to
  edit VPZ, to launch the simulation and to get the results of the simulation
  within the R environment.

In addition to the structure and the dynamic of models, the VPZ format stores
the experimental frame. In the experimental design phase, the modeller chooses
the states to observe and how to look at their evolution over time, i.e. the
visualization component to use. Moreover, the modeller defines the initial
conditions and the duration of the simulation. The modeller can define the
variation domain for the initial parameters. Thereafter, VLE computes the
number of simulations needed to achieve the experimental plan. The default
behavior is an exhaustive experimental plan (i.e. the cross product of initials
conditions). Starting from this stage, tools as RVLE and PyVLE are very useful
since they provide tools to parameterize experimental designs, display results,
edit VPZ.

The VLE framework is written in the standardized C++ programming language. C++
ensures the compatibility with a large number of operating systems and the
interoperability with the major programming languages as Java, Fortran or
Python for instance. We increase the portability of VLE using the portable
libraries provided by the [GNU Project](http://wwww.gnu.org) and the [Boost
library](http://www.boost.org). The choices of C++, the GNU libraries and the
concepts of components have made the VLE an efficient and portable environment,
easily modifiable and fast to develop.

# Publications

All publications leading to the availability of [VLE] and part of [VLE] usage
are described in the [publications] page.

{{% fluid_img src="/media/gvle-1.1.2.png" caption="GVLE 1.1.2 in action" %}}

   [VLE]: /about/vle-details
   [publications]: /about/publications
