+++
categories = []
date = "2015-09-15T10:28:18+02:00"
description = ""
keywords = []
title = "VLE"
menu = "documentation"
+++

### Kernel

In VLE, we have implemented the [DSDE abstract
simulator](http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=293257) developed by [Fernando
J. Barros](http://eden.dei.uc.pt/~barros/) which enable parallelization of
   atomic models and dynamic structure changes during simulation. We also
   introduced an observation framework in the DEVS kernel simulator of VLE.

VLE proposes a lot of formalisms called DEVS extensions:

- Difference equation.
- Differential equation for the resolution of differential equation systems
  with QSS, Euler, Runge Kutta methods
- Finite State Automate: FD DEVS, UML State-chart, Moore and Mealy
- High level Petri net
- CellDEVS: cellular automata
- CellQSS: association of CellDEVS and QSS for the resolution of spatialized
  differential equation systems
- Decision

Based on the DEVS theory, we ensure the compatibility of models and DEVS
extensions at formal and operational levels.

### VLE as an environment

VLE provides complete libraries named *VLE Foundation Libraries* (VFL) and
tools for models design and simulation:

- GVLE is a graphical user interface. It provides tools to visually construct a
  hierarchy of coupled models. A modelling plug-in can be use to define and to
  modify the behaviour of atomic models displaying a text editor where DEVS
  functions can be coded. Moreover, GVLE enables the definition of experimental
  frames. Results of the modeling activity (structure and dynamics of the
  models) are stored in a particular XML format call VPZ (*Virtual laboratory
  Project Zip*).
- VLE is the core of the environment. The four other applications depend on VLE
  (that is why the name of this application is the same as the general
  framework). VLE implements the DEVS abstracts simulators and the extensions
  cited in the previous section. To perform simulations, VLE records the
  experimental frame generated by GVLE and then dynamically loads simulation
  and visualisation components of EOV and finally connect them to the DEVS-Bus.
  The Simulation plug-ins simulate the behaviours of the DEVS atomic models and
  VLE coordinates the simulation.
- RVLE (R for VLE) is a R-Package to build experimental frames, to edit VPZ, to
  launch the simulation and to get the results of the simulation within the R
  environment.
- PyVLE (Python for VLE) is a Python package to build experimental frames, to
  edit VPZ, to launch the simulation and to get the results of the simulation
  within the R environment.

In addition to the structure and the dynamic of models, the [VPZ](VPZ
"wikilink") format stores the experimental frame. In the experimental design
phase, the modeller chooses the states to observe and how to look at their
evolution over time, i.e. the visualization component to use. Moreover, the
modeller defines the initial conditions and the duration of the simulation. The
modeller can define the variation domain for the initial parameters.
Thereafter, VLE computes the number of simulations needed to achieve the
experimental plan. The default behavior is an exhaustive experimental plan
(i.e. the cross product of initials conditions). Starting from this stage,
tools as RVLE and PyVLE are very useful since they provide tools to
parameterize experimental designs, display results, edit [VPZ](VPZ "wikilink").

The VLE framework is written in the standardized C++ programming language. C++
ensures the compatibility with a large number of operating systems and the
interoperability with the major programming languages as Java, Fortran or
Python for instance. We increase the portability of VLE using the portable
libraries provided by the [GNU Project](http://wwww.gnu.org) and the [Boost
library](http://www.boost.org). The choices of C++, the GNU libraries and the
concepts of components have made the VLE an efficient and portable environment,
easily modifiable and fast to develop.
