+++
topics = ["about"]
title = "About"
description = "What, Why, Who, When, and How?"
weight = 9
+++

## The _Virtual Laboratory Environment_

VLE is a multi-modelling and simulation platform. It is a powerful modeller
and a simulator supporting the use of different formalisms for the
specification of models and implementing the corresponding solvers in a unified
manner.

In addition to the classical use of one single formalism for modelling and
simulation, VLE integrates, i.e. couples, heterogeneous formalisms in one
coherent simulation model. VLE supports the new generation of inter-
disciplinary simulation models…

VLE is a powerful modeller and a simulator supporting the use of different
formalisms for the specification of models and implementing the corresponding
solvers in a unified manner. VLE proposes a lot of formalisms called DEVS
extensions: Difference equation, Differential equation for the resolution of
differential equation systems with QSS, Euler, Runge Kutta methods, Finite
State Automate, High level Petri net, CellDEVS, CellQSS and a Decision making
system.

Based on the DEVS theory, we ensure the compatibility of models and DEVS
extensions at formal and operational levels.

## As an environment

VLE provides complete libraries named *VLE Foundation Libraries* (VFL) and
tools for models design and simulation:

- VLE is the core of the environment. The four other applications depend on
  VLE (that is why the name of this application is the same as the general
  framework). VLE implements the DEVS abstracts simulators and the extensions
  cited in the previous section. To perform simulations, VLE records the
  experimental frame generated by [GVLE] and then dynamically loads simulation
  and visualisation components of EOV and finally connect them to the DEVS-Bus.
  The Simulation plug-ins simulate the behaviours of the DEVS atomic models and
  VLE coordinates the simulation.
- [GVLE] is a graphical user interface developed with [Qt5]. It provides tools to visually construct
  a hierarchy of coupled models. A modelling plug-in can be use to define and
  to modify the behaviour of atomic models displaying a text editor where DEVS
  functions can be coded. Moreover, [GVLE] enables the definition of
  experimental frames. Results of the modelling activity (structure and
  dynamics of the models) are stored in a particular XML format call [VPZ].
- [RVLE] is a R-Package to build experimental frames, to edit [VPZ], to launch
  the simulation and to get the results of the simulation within the R
  environment.
- [PyVLE] is a Python package to build experimental frames, to edit [VPZ], to
  launch the simulation and to get the results of the simulation within the R
  environment.

In addition to the structure and the dynamic of models, the [VPZ] format stores
the experimental frame. In the experimental design phase, the modeller chooses
the states to observe and how to look at their evolution over time, i.e. the
visualization component to use. Moreover, the modeller defines the initial
conditions and the duration of the simulation. The modeller can define the
variation domain for the initial parameters. Thereafter, VLE computes the
number of simulations needed to achieve the experimental plan. The default
behaviour is an exhaustive experimental plan (i.e. the cross product of
initials conditions). Starting from this stage, tools as [RVLE] and [PyVLE]
since they provide tools to parametrize experimental designs, display results,
edit [VPZ].

The VLE framework is written in the standardized C++ programming language. C++
ensures the compatibility with a large number of operating systems and the
interoperability with the major programming languages as Java, Fortran or
Python for instance. The choices of C++, the Qt libraries and the concepts of
components have made the VLE an efficient and portable environment, easily
modifiable and fast to develop.

## Publications

All publications leading to the availability of VLE and part of
VLE usage are described in the [publications](publications)
page.

{{% fluid_img src="/media/gvle-1.1.2.png" caption="[GVLE] 1.1.2 in action" %}}

[GVLE]: ../documentation/users/gvle
[RVLE]: ../documentation/users/rvle
[PyVLE]: ../documentation/users/pyvle
[VPZ]: ../documentation/dev/vpz-format
[Qt5]: https://www.qt.io/
